---
layout: post
title: "Part 2: Sending a Message"
date: 2017-01-28 14:00:00 -800
Categories: teensy
---

## Overview

In this post, we're going to set up the Teensy for serial
communication with the outside world. We'll be able to use this serial
connection to send debug information back to our computers.

Serial communication is very timing-sensitive. Because of this, we
can't use a serial connection until we have a very stable clock source
configured.

### A serial interface

To connect the serial pins of the Teensy to our computer, we will need
some sort of USB serial interface. I'll be using an Arduino Leonardo
for this. Any arduino-compatible device with at least one hardware
serial port will work, including a second Teensy. You may also be able
to find an FTDI breakout board or cable - but they're pricey enough
that a second development board is probably a better investment. Trust
me, you can never have too many development boards!

The Teensy 3.2 and 3.5 are 5V tolerant, meaning they can be safely
used with just about any USB to serial converter (including the
Arduino Leonardo that I'm using). The 3.1 and 3.6 require an adapter
running at 3.3V. For them, you'll likely want to either use another
Teensy, or a dedicated 3.3v serial adapter. Be careful about USB to
RS232 adapters. They run at much higher volatages than the
microcontroller, and *will* fry your teensy if you try to use one. You
want an adapter that has pin headers, not one with a DE-9 plug.

If you're using an Arduino or Teensy as your adapter, check out the
[serial_forward][serial_forward] Arduino sketch in the code
repository. Running this sketch will cause any output from our Teensy
to be forwarded through our Arduino to the IDE's console.

[serial_forward]: https://github.com/branan/teensy/tree/master/serial_forward

## Cleaner Register Handling

In the first post, we hand-coded all of our volatile register accesses
and bit manipulations. This is useful for understanding how the MCU
works, but has a few problems:

* Complex bit manipulations become "write-only" - it is hard to read
  the code and understand what's happening

* We skipped some types of bounds checking, because it would have made
  the code even harder to read. It would be nice to have this.

* Volatile accesses introduce lots of extra "unsafe" blocks, making it
  hard for us to see when we have code (like the Port and Gpio) that
  actually does weird things with memory.

To solve these, we will use a pair of crates from Philipp Oppermann:
`volatile` and `bit_field`. The `volatile` crate provides safe
wrappers for accessing volatile integers, like our hardware
registers. This is paired with `bit_field` to streamline our
manipulation of those registers.

### Rewriting the Watchdog

The Watchdog provides a good demonstration for how these crates are
used. The updated code is shown below:

{% highlight rust %}
use volatile::Volatile;
use bit_field::BitField;

#[repr(C,packed)]
pub struct Watchdog {
    stctrlh: Volatile<u16>,
    stctrll: Volatile<u16>,
    tovalh: Volatile<u16>,
    tovall: Volatile<u16>,
    winh: Volatile<u16>,
    winl: Volatile<u16>,
    refresh: Volatile<u16>,
    unlock: Volatile<u16>,
    tmrouth: Volatile<u16>,
    tmroutl: Volatile<u16>,
    rstcnt: Volatile<u16>,
    presc: Volatile<u16>
}

impl Watchdog {
    pub unsafe fn new() -> &'static mut Watchdog {
        &mut *(0x40052000 as *mut Watchdog)
    }

    pub fn disable(&mut self) {
        self.unlock.write(0xC520);
        self.unlock.write(0xD928);
        unsafe {
            asm!("nop" : : : "memory");
            asm!("nop" : : : "memory");
        }
        self.stctrlh.update(|ctrl| {
            ctrl.set_bit(0, false);
        });
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

All of the struct fields are now `Volatile`. This type is always the
same size as the integer it wraps, so it can be dropped in like this
without requiring any changes to our struct layout. The `new` function
is unchanged, and is still unafe. Most of the change comes in the
`disable` method.

We no longer need the entire body of this function to be unsafe - we
now mark only the inline assembly as such. The unlock writes at the
start of the method are much easier to read than they were with the
`core::ptr::write_volatile` method. Our read-modify-write of the
`ctrlh` register is also clearly marked by the `update` method, and
the `set_bit` function makes it clear what we're doing to the register
bits.

### Other Structs

The changes to the SIM are very similar to those for the watchdog -
switching to `update` and `set_bit`, instead of raw volatile
operations and bit manipulations. The Port and Gpio structs have some
special considerations:

* Since `Port::set_pin_mode` can affect other objects (Pin or Gpio
  instances) it needs to stay unsafe, even though it now only uses
  safe functions.

* The GPIO methods all still need unsafe blocks to deal with the raw
  pointer to the GPIO struct.

Both of these are fine, though - we're actually doing weird things
with memory in the Port and Gpio structs, so they *should* be flagged
as unsafe. Now that we aren't forced to use unsafe for all register
accesses, it becomes more obvious that this code requires special
care.

All of these changes can be seen [on github][commit].

[commit]: https://github.com/branan/teensy/commit/59442ed871c59a0de80af3ab828f01aa9531dd3a

### Updating the linker script

Bringing in these crates also requires a small change to our linker
script. The bit_field crate contains a bunch of strings, since it can
panic on certain overflow errors. We need to be sure that those
strings end up in the Teensy's flash.

If we do nothing it will actually work - for now. The linker will put
all unknown sections right after our last defined section. In this
case, that means "right after the code", so they will end up at a
reasonable place in the flash. It is better to be explicit with this,
so that we do not accidentally break it later. We will add a new
section to our `layout.ld` to handle these strings:

```
    .rodata : {
        *(.rodata*)
    } > FLASH
```

## A more stable clock

When the MK20DX256 boots, it runs off of an internal reference
clock. This is more than fast enough for our needs - The processor
runs somewhere between 20MHz and 25MHz - but it is not accurate
enough. In order to connect to another device over a serial interface,
we need a clock error below about 3%.

Fortunately, the Teensy is equipped with an accurate 16MHz crystal
oscillator.  We will use this crystal as a reference to establish a
very stable 72MHz frequency for the MCU.

If you're using a Teensy 3.6, you're on your own here - the clock
generator in the MK66FX1M0 chip has very different parameters than the
one in the earlier chips. If you're well-versed in reading data
sheets, you should be able to sort out the differences. Feel free to
email me if you need help here.

If you're using a Teensy 3.0, the maximum rated clock speed is
slower. You'll need to update some of the parameters used to stay
within the manufacturer's rated speeds, but the overall register
layout is the same.

### Clock Modes

There are a number of modes that the MK20DX256's clock system can be
in. They control which basic oscillator (the very accurate external
crystal or a less-accurate internal reference) is used, and how that
reference is multiplied to produce the final clock speed.

The procesor starts in FEI mode - "FLL enabled, internal
(reference)". This means that the clock is generated by the "Frequency
Locked Loop", based on the internal 32KHz reference. Our goal is to
transition the clock generator to "PEE" mode, which means the clock is
generated by the "Phase Locked Loop", based on the external 16MHz
crystal reference. The difference between frequency- and
phase-locked-loops is outside the scope of this post, but in general a
PLL creates a more stable output frequency.

From FEI mode, we will transition the processor through FBE and PBE
modes, before arriving in PEE mode. We will rely on Rust's type system
to ensure that our transitions between these modes are safe and
correct.

### The Clock Registers.

Before we dive into the clock's state machine, we'll look at the basic
clock registers. Like all the other functional units of the MK20DX256,
the MCG (Master Clock Generator) is represented by a block of
registers at a known address:

{% highlight rust %}
use volatile::Volatile;
use bit_field::BitField;

#[repr(C,packed)]
pub struct Mcg {
    c1: Volatile<u8>,
    c2: Volatile<u8>,
    c3: Volatile<u8>,
    c4: Volatile<u8>,
    c5: Volatile<u8>,
    c6: Volatile<u8>,
    s: Volatile<u8>,
    _pad0: u8,
    sc: Volatile<u8>,
    _pad1: u8,
    atcvh: Volatile<u8>,
    atcvl: Volatile<u8>,
    c7: Volatile<u8>,
    c8: Volatile<u8>,
}

impl Mcg {
    pub unsafe fn new() -> &'static mut Mcg {
        &mut *(0x40064000 as *mut Mcg)
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

This is the familiar pattern of defining the memory layout as a packed
struct, with our `new` method being an unsafe way to create that
struct at the appropriate hardware address for these registers.

### The Clock State Machine

Each of the clock mode transitions represents small modifications to
the MCG - typically just a few bits changed in a
register. Unfortunately, the set of valid modifications changes with
the mode. Invalid modifications can cause the processor itself to fail
in unexpected ways (all CPUs rely on a stable clock, after all). We
*could* just rely on ourselves to only program the MCG properly, but
we would be better served by building tools to ensure we do it safely
and correctly.

We'll start by defining each of our possible states as a struct
holding a mutable reference to the MCG. Each of these structs will
have methods impl'd on them that allow only the changes to the MCG
which are safe in that state. There is no struct for PEE mode, since
we have no need to modify the MCG at that point. A more complete
impmlementation would include PEE mode, as well as the other states
that we aren't using.

{% highlight rust %}
pub struct Fei {
    mcg: &'static mut Mcg
}

pub struct Fbe {
    mcg: &'static mut Mcg
}

pub struct Pbe {
    mcg: &'static mut Mcg
}
{% endhighlight %}

Now, for each struct, we will need to define the functions that
transition the clock to the next state. We will start with the FEI to
FBE transition. For this, we need to enable the crystal oscillator,
and then switch our output to it. This second operation will also
consume the Fei instance, returning an Fbe instance. This represents
the transition of the MCG from using the FLL based on the internal
reference (FEI mode), to being clocked directly from the external
crystal (FBE mode).

Even though we're transitioning away from using the FLL, we want to be
sure that we continue to operate it within its normal parameters. This
is why we must pass in a clock divider for it - our 16MHz crystal is
far too fast to be used as a reference for the FLL without this
divider. Making sure that we do things right will also make it easier
to expand this code to support FEE and other modes in the future.

In both functions, we must wait for our changes to take effect before
we continue. We read the status register in a loop until the MCG
reports that it is in the expected state.

{% highlight rust %}
pub enum OscRange {
    Low = 0,
    High = 1,
    VeryHigh = 2
}

enum OscSource {
    LockedLoop = 0,
    Internal = 1,
    External = 2
}

impl Fei {
    pub fn enable_xtal(&mut self, range: OscRange) {
        self.mcg.c2.update(|c2| {
            c2.set_bits(4..6, range as u8);
            c2.set_bit(2, true);
        });

        // Wait for the crystal oscillator to become enabled.
        while !self.mcg.s.read().get_bit(1) {}
    }

    pub fn use_external(self, divide: u32) -> Fbe {
        let osc = self.mcg.c2.read().get_bits(4..6);
        let frdiv = if osc == OscRange::Low as u8 {
            match divide {
                1 => 0,
                2 => 1,
                4 => 2,
                8 => 3,
                16 => 4,
                32 => 5,
                64 => 6,
                128 => 7,
                _ => panic!("Invalid external clock divider: {}", divide)
            }
        } else {
            match divide {
                32 => 0,
                64 => 1,
                128 => 2,
                256 => 3,
                512 => 4,
                1024 => 5,
                1280 => 6,
                1536 => 7,
                _ => panic!("Invalid external clock divider: {}", divide)
            }
        };

        self.mcg.c1.update(|c1| {
            c1.set_bits(6..8, OscSource::External as u8);
            c1.set_bits(3..6, frdiv);
            c1.set_bit(2, false);
        });

        // Once we write to the control register, we need to wait for
        // the new clock to stabilize before we move on.
        // First: Wait for the FLL to be pointed at the crystal
        // Then: Wait for our clock source to be the crystal osc
        while self.mcg.s.read().get_bit(4) {}
        while self.mcg.s.read().get_bits(2..4) != OscSource::External as u8 {}

        Fbe { mcg: self.mcg }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

From FBE mode, we transition to PBE mode by enabling the PLL. This
will be done as a single function, which takes the PLL divider
parameters. Our output frequency will be the crystal frequency
(16MHz) multiplied by the fraction numerator/denominator.

{% highlight rust %}
impl Fbe {
    pub fn enable_pll(self, numerator: u8, denominator: u8) -> Pbe {
        if numerator < 24 || numerator > 55 {
            panic!("Invalid PLL VCO divide factor: {}", numerator);
        }

        if denominator < 1 || denominator > 25 {
            panic!("Invalid PLL reference divide factor: {}", denominator);
        }

        self.mcg.c5.update(|c5| {
            c5.set_bits(0..5, denominator - 1);
        });

        self.mcg.c6.update(|c6| {
            c6.set_bits(0..5, numerator - 24);
            c6.set_bit(6, true);
        });

        // Wait for PLL to be enabled
        while !self.mcg.s.read().get_bit(5) {}
        // Wait for the PLL to be "locked" and stable
        while !self.mcg.s.read().get_bit(6) {}

        Pbe { mcg: self.mcg }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

This gets us to PBE mode, or "PLL Bypassed, based on the External
oscillator". The PLL will be running at our desired frequency here,
but not selected as the main clock source. The last step is to engage
the PLL, making it our actual clock source. There's a little bit of
weirdness in our wait loop here, due to how the MCG reports which of
the FLL or PLL is in use.

This function consumes the Pbe instance, but does not return
anything. This is because we are "done" with clock setup here. If you
wanted to potentially transition out of PEE mode, you would return
some sort of value here to allow continued modification of the clock
state.

{% highlight rust %}
impl Pbe {
    pub fn use_pll(self) {
        self.mcg.c1.update(|c1| {
            c1.set_bits(6..8, OscSource::LockedLoop as u8);
        });

        // mcg.c1 and mcg.s have slightly different behaviors.  In c1,
        // we use one value to indicate "Use whichever LL is
        // enabled". In s, it is differentiated between the FLL at 0,
        // and the PLL at 3. Instead of adding a value to OscSource
        // which would be invalid to set, we just check for the known
        // value "3" here.
        while self.mcg.s.read().get_bits(2..4) != 3 {}
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

That's it for the clock mode transitions! When we update main, we'll
work through each of these clock modes, starting from FEI, to move the
MCG to the state we want it in. At each step, we know that we can only
make the modifications that are safe.

The last part of clock setup is getting our initial Fei instance from
the MCG. The MCG, however, doesn't know that it's in FEI mode. We need
to query the various control registers to determine which state it is
actually in, and return the appropriate struct. For the purposes of
this blog post, we'll panic if the clock is in an unknown state. In
production code, you'd want to implement the full set of clock states
so that this function would always return a valid value.

{% highlight rust %}
pub enum Clock {
    Fei(Fei),
    Fbe(Fbe),
    Pbe(Pbe)
}

impl mcg {
    pub fn clock(&'static mut self) -> Clock {
        let source: OscSource = unsafe {
            mem::transmute(self.c1.read().get_bits(6..8))
        };
        let fll_internal = self.c1.read().get_bit(2);
        let pll_enabled = self.c6.read().get_bit(6);

        match (fll_internal, pll_enabled, source) {
            (true, false, OscSource::LockedLoop) => Clock::Fei(Fei{ mcg: self }),
            (false, false, OscSource::External) => Clock::Fbe(Fbe{ mcg: self }),
            (_, true, OscSource::External) => Clock::Pbe(Pbe{ mcg: self }),
            _ => panic!("The current clock mode cannot be represented as a known struct")
        }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

There is a bit of unsafety here, to coerce the oscillator selection
field to our enum type. We otherwise are simply comparing the set of
control registers to the expected values for each known mode.

### The Oscillator Unit

I wasn't entirely truthful when I said we were "enableing the crystal"
earlier. What we actually did was select the crystal as the clock
source for the PLL. The crystal oscillator itself needs to be enabled
and configured through its own set of registers. We'll put the code
for this in a file called `osc.rs`.

{% highlight rust %}
use volatile::Volatile;
use bit_field::BitField;

pub struct Osc {
    cr: Volatile<u8>
}

impl Osc {
    pub unsafe fn new() -> &'static mut Osc {
        &mut *(0x40065000 as *mut Osc)
    }

    pub fn enable(&mut self, capacitance: u8) {
        if capacitance % 2 == 1 || capacitance > 30 {
            panic!("Invalid crystal capacitance value: {}", capacitance)
        }

        let mut cr: u8 = 0;

        // The capacitance control bits are backwards, and start at 2pf
        // We swizzle them all here
        cr.set_bit(3, capacitance.get_bit(1));
        cr.set_bit(2, capacitance.get_bit(2));
        cr.set_bit(1, capacitance.get_bit(3));
        cr.set_bit(0, capacitance.get_bit(4));

        // enable the crystal oscillator
        cr.set_bit(7, true);

        self.cr.write(cr);
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

The oscillator is very simple compared to some of the functional units
we've had to deal with. Most of the body of this function is setting
the capacitive load for the crystal (between 2pf and 30pf). It also
sets the enable bit, to turn on the oscillator.

### Putting it Together & Updating main

We've created two new files for managing two new functional units of
the MCU: the MCG and the OSC. The OSC has a single function to enable
the unit, and set the capacitance needed for the external crystal. The
MCG has a series of structs that define a state machine for bringing
the clock machinery to the correct mode. We'll update main to take
advantage of these. At the end we still just turn on the LED, but in
between we now set up the clock machinery to run the MCU at its rated
72MHz.

{% highlight rust %}
extern fn main() {
    let (wdog,sim,mcg,osc,pin) = unsafe {
        (watchdog::Watchdog::new(),
         sim::Sim::new(),
         mcg::Mcg::new(),
         osc::Osc::new(),
         port::Port::new(port::PortName::C).pin(5))
    };

    wdog.disable();
    // Enable the crystal oscillator with 10pf of capacitance
    osc.enable(10);
    // Turn on the Port C clock gate
    sim.enable_clock(sim::Clock::PortC);
    // Set our clocks:
    // core: 72Mhz
    // peripheral: 36MHz
    // flash: 24MHz
    sim.set_dividers(1, 2, 3);
    // We would also set the USB divider here if we wanted to use it.

    // Now we can start setting up the MCG for our needs.
    if let mcg::Clock::Fei(mut fei) = mcg.clock() {
        // Our 16MHz xtal is "very fast", and needs to be divided
        // by 512 to be in the acceptable FLL range.
        fei.enable_xtal(mcg::OscRange::VeryHigh);
        let fbe = fei.use_external(512);

        // PLL is 27/6 * xtal == 72MHz
        let pbe = fbe.enable_pll(27, 6);
        pbe.use_pll();
    } else {
        panic!("Somehow the clock wasn't in FEI mode");
    }

    let mut gpio = pin.make_gpio();

    gpio.output();
    gpio.high();

    loop {}
}
{% endhighlight %}

This looks a lot more complicated, but is really only a few
changes. From the top:

* We add the OSC and MCG to the list functional units we want
  references for.
* After the watchdog is disabled, we enable the external oscillator,
  with 10pf of capacitiance. This is the right amount for the cyrstal
  on the Teensy. You might need a different number, if you have a
  different board.
* We set the "clock dividers" of the SIM. More on this below.
* If the clock is in FEI mode, we transition it to PEE mode using the
  set of functions we defined above. If it's not in FEI mode we panic,
  since it should always been in FEI mode at boot.

The only thing we haven't already covered is the new `set_dividers`
method of the SIM. We want to run the main CPU core at 72MHz, but not
all the parts of the chip can run that fast. We need to keep the
peripheral bus below 50MHz, and the Flash below 25MHz. This function
sets up the "clock dividers", so that we can keep the bus and flash
running at the slower speeds that they are rated for.

{% highlight rust %}
impl Sim
    pub fn set_dividers(&mut self, core: u32, bus: u32, flash: u32) {
        let mut clkdiv: u32 = 0;
        clkdiv.set_bits(28..32, core-1);
        clkdiv.set_bits(24..28, bus-1);
        clkdiv.set_bits(16..20, flash-1);
        self.clkdiv1.write(clkdiv);
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

## The Serial Port

Now that we have a stable clock, we can move on to configuring the
serial port, or *UART* (Universal Asynchronous
Reciever/Transmitter). For our needs the UART itself is fairly easy to
program. Most of the challenge here will be in expanding our pin
handling to support serial functionality.

### More About Pins

When we first set up a GPIO pin, we had a couple of advantages:

1. All pins can act as GPIOs, so we didn't need any validation logic.
2. All pins use the same mux value when configured as a GPIO.

For the UART, neither of these shortcuts holds. Our setup code will
need to know both which pins can be used for serial communication, and
which mux value will appropriately connect those pins to the UART.

Just as for the GPIO, we will add functions to the Pin struct to
convert a pin to a serial-specific struct.

{% highlight rust %}
pub struct Tx(u8);
pub struct Rx(u8);

impl Pin {
    pub fn make_rx(self) -> Rx {
        unsafe {
            let port = &mut *self.port;
            match (port.name(), self.pin) {
                (PortName::B, 16) => {
                    port.set_pin_mode(self.pin, 3);
                    Rx(0)
                },
                _ => panic!("Invalid serial RX pin")
            }
        }
    }

    pub fn make_tx(self) -> Tx {
        unsafe {
            let port = &mut *self.port;
            match (port.name(), self.pin) {
                (PortName::B, 17) => {
                    port.set_pin_mode(self.pin, 3);
                    Tx(0)
                },
                _ => panic!("Invalid serial TX pin")
            }
        }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Each Tx or Rx instance includes which UART it is valid for. We could
choose to encode this in the type system, but that sends us down a
road of a lot of complexity (possibly including separate Structs for
each UART). We still potentially panic when converting an invalid pin
to an Rx or Tx instance, so the tradeoff of avoiding another panic
when passing that pin to the wrong UART doesn't seem worth it. Your
needs might be different.

This code also reference a new `PortName::B`. This is easy to add to
the existing Port and GPIO code. The Port lives at 0x4004A000, and the
GpioBitband is at 0x43FE0800.

We now have the code in place to set up pins B16 and B17 as UART
pins. These map to pins 0 and 1 on the Teensy, the same as `Serial1`
when programming the Teensy with the Arduino IDE.

### The UART

The UART is our first struct that will require a complex `::new`
implementation. In addition to selecting which UART unit we will use,
the method must handle several other parameters:

* An optional Rx pin, to enable recieve functionality
* An optional Tx pin, to enable transmit functinality
* The clock divider, as an A,B pair. This is interpreted as `A +
  B/32`.

On the Teensy 3.5 or 3.6, you could choose to use a float for the
third parameter. This would require you to then convert it to the
integers used by the hardware module itself. It's up to you if this
extra work is worth the simpler interface.

{% highlight rust %}
use volatile::Volatile;
use bit_field::BitField;

use core;

use super::port::{Rx,Tx};

#[repr(C,packed)]
pub struct Uart {
    bdh: Volatile<u8>,
    bdl: Volatile<u8>,
    c1: Volatile<u8>,
    c2: Volatile<u8>,
    s1: Volatile<u8>,
    s2: Volatile<u8>,
    c3: Volatile<u8>,
    d: Volatile<u8>,
    ma1: Volatile<u8>,
    ma2: Volatile<u8>,
    c4: Volatile<u8>,
    c5: Volatile<u8>,
    ed: Volatile<u8>,
    modem: Volatile<u8>,
    ir: Volatile<u8>,
}


impl Uart {
    pub unsafe fn new(id: u8, rx: Option<Rx>, tx: Option<Tx>, clkdiv: (u16,u8)) -> &'static mut Uart {
        if let Some(r) = rx.as_ref() {
            if r.uart() != id {
                panic!("Invalid RX pin for UART {}", id);
            }
        }
        if let Some(t) = tx.as_ref() {
            if t.uart() != id {
                panic!("Invalid TX pin for UART {}", id);
            }
        }
        if clkdiv.0 >= 8192 {
            panic!("Invalid UART clock divider: {}", clkdiv.0);
        }
        if clkdiv.1 >= 32 {
            panic!("Invalid UART fractional divisor: {}", clkdiv.1);
        }

        let uart = match id {
            0 => &mut *(0x4006A000 as *mut Uart),
            _ => panic!("Invalid UART id: {}", id)
        };

        uart.c4.update(|c4| {
            c4.set_bits(0..5, clkdiv.1);
        });
        uart.bdh.update(|bdh| {
            bdh.set_bits(0..5, clkdiv.0.get_bits(8..13) as u8);
        });
        uart.bdl.write(clkdiv.0.get_bits(0..8) as u8);

        uart.c2.update(|c2| {
            c2.set_bit(2, rx.is_some());
            c2.set_bit(3, tx.is_some());
        });

        uart
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

This starts with validating the parameters: The Rx and Tx pins must be
usable for this UART, and the clock dividers need to be in the
acceptable range. The clock dividers are passed to the
hardware. Lastly, recieve and transmit are enabled if appropriate pins
were passed in, and the Uart reference is returned.

### String Output

To use the UART as an output device, we will implement the
`core::fmt::Write` trait for it. This will enable the `write!` macro,
and make it easy to use a UART for output from our panic handler.

Most of the functions in the `Write` trait have default
implementations, which we will rely on. The only one we must implement
is `write_str`. Our implementation writes each byte of the string in
sequeuence, waiting in between for the hardware to indicate that it is
ready for another byte.

{% highlight rust %}
impl core::fmt::Write for Uart {
    fn write_str(&mut self, s: &str) -> core::fmt::Result {
        for b in s.bytes() {
            while !self.s1.read().get_bit(7) {}
            self.d.write(b);
        }
        Ok(())
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Hello, World!

Adding serial output to our main is now just a few lines of
code. First, enable the Port B and UART clocks:

{% highlight rust %}
sim.enable_clock(sim::Clock::PortB);
sim.enable_clock(sim::Clock::Uart0);
{% endhighlight %}

With those clocks enabled, we can grab a uart instance, and write a
message:

{% highlight rust %}
let mut uart = unsafe {
    let rx = port::Port::new(port::PortName::B).pin(16).make_rx();
    let tx = port::Port::new(port::PortName::B).pin(17).make_tx();
    uart::Uart::new(0, Some(rx), Some(tx), (468, 24))
};

writeln!(uart, "Hello, World").unwrap();
{% endhighlight %}

This sets the UART clock divider as 468.75 (24/32). The baud rate will
be 72MHz/(16*468.75), or 9600. This is a pretty standard rate, and
will be easy to use with any serial adapter.

Finally, we send a message across the serial port. How you recieve
this message will depend on the specific adapter you're using. If
you're using an Arduino, open the serial console in the IDE and watch
for the message to appear when you reset the Teensy.

## Next Time

Now that we have good output capabilities, we will use them to make
our panic handler useful. With good panics, we can then focus on
cleaning up our hardware setup to be safer and more robust. Our goal
will be to minimize the amount of unsafe code in `main`.